ImmuneResponse.pathogenesis.md (#549)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/07.pathogenesis.md

- Antibody production against SARS-CoV-2 by patient who recovered vs patient who did not recover
- Cytokines and other soluble factors contribution to immune response

> Pathogens infect hosts and hosts have immune defenses and responses; furthermore, pathogens have developed ways to evade the immune system as well as, in general, various ways to manipulate the host.

Author: ```suggestion
Pathogens infect hosts and are fought by host immune defenses.
However, pathogens have developed ways to evade the immune system as well as various ways to manipulate the host immunity.
```

Author: incorporated feedback/edits from Dr. Nadia Danilova.

- Antibody production against SARS-CoV-2 by patient who recovered vs patient who did not recover
- Cytokines and other soluble factors contribution to immune response

Pathogens infect hosts and are fought by host immune defenses.
However, pathogens have developed ways to evade the immune system as well as various ways to manipulate the host immunity.

> Other general complexities to consider include the following: disease symptoms can be due to a pathogen or due to the reaction of the immune system to the pathogen; the host immune system can defend against or fight infection but it can also sometimes cause too much damage to the host [@isbn: 9780815332183; @isbn: 9780071283663].

Author: ```suggestion
Other general complexities to consider include the following: disease symptoms can be due to a pathogen or due to the reaction of the immune system to the pathogen; the host immune system can defend against infection but it can also sometimes cause too much damage to the host [@isbn: 9780815332183; @isbn: 9780071283663].
```

Author: based on feedback/edits from Dr. Nadia Danilova.

For SARS-CoV-2, we briefly mention here some of the reviews which describe the primary research literature so far along with some context.

> There is a review on interferon-mediated innate antiviral responses which are initiated by the virus-infected cells themselves but can also sometimes have inflammatory and systemic effects [@doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.008].

Author: ```suggestion
There is a review on interferon-mediated innate antiviral responses initiated by the virus-infected cells themselves, which can sometimes have inflammatory and other systemic effects [@doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.008].
```

Author: incorporated feedback/edits from Dr. Nadia Danilova.

Also, there is a review on the innate immune system response with a focus on innate immune cells and responses other than the interferon-mediated responses; the review also approaches the question of how the innate immune response can confer protection or induce pathogenesis through a dysregulated response [@doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.009].

> For acquired immunity, there is a review on the levels of different SARS-CoV-2-specific antibodies (as well as viral RNA) detected over the course of an infection [@doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00879].

Author: ```suggestion
There are also acquired immunity responses to SARS-CoV-2.
There is a review on the levels of different SARS-CoV-2-specific antibodies detected over the course of an infection [@doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00879].
```

Author: incorporated feedback/edits from Dr. Nadia Danilova.

- Antibody production against SARS-CoV-2 by patient who recovered vs patient who did not recover
- Cytokines and other soluble factors contribution to immune response

Pathogens infect hosts and are fought by host immune defenses.
However, pathogens have developed ways to evade the immune system as well as various ways to manipulate the host immunity.

> Other general complexities to consider include the following: disease symptoms can be due to a pathogen or due to the reaction of the immune system to the pathogen; the host immune system can defend against infection but it can also sometimes cause too much damage to the host [@isbn: 9780815332183; @isbn: 9780071283663].

Author: ```suggestion
Other general complexities to consider include the following: disease symptoms can be due to a pathogen or due to the reaction of the immune system to the pathogen; the host immune system can defend against infection but it can also sometimes cause too much damage to the host [@isbn:9780815332183; @isbn:9780071283663].
```

For SARS-CoV-2, we briefly mention here some of the reviews which describe the primary research literature so far along with some context.

> There is a review on interferon-mediated innate antiviral responses initiated by the virus-infected cells themselves, which can sometimes have inflammatory and other systemic effects [@doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.008].

Author: ```suggestion
There is a review on interferon-mediated innate antiviral responses initiated by the virus-infected cells themselves, which can sometimes have inflammatory and other systemic effects [@doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.008].
```

> Also, there is a review on the innate immune system response with a focus on innate immune cells and responses other than the interferon-mediated responses; the review also approaches the question of how the innate immune response can confer protection or induce pathogenesis through a dysregulated response [@doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.009].

Author: ```suggestion
Also, there is a review on the innate immune system response with a focus on innate immune cells and responses other than the interferon-mediated responses; the review also approaches the question of how the innate immune response can confer protection or induce pathogenesis through a dysregulated response [@doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.009].
```

There are also acquired immunity responses to SARS-CoV-2.

> There is a review on the levels of different SARS-CoV-2-specific antibodies detected over the course of an infection [@doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00879].

Author: ```suggestion
There is a review on the levels of different SARS-CoV-2-specific antibodies detected over the course of an infection [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2020.00879].
```

> A review of T-cell mediated responses to respiratory coronaviruses notes a large reduction in T-cells associated with the acute phase of SARS (from SARS-CoV-1) [@doi: 10.1007/s12026-014-8534-z].

Author: ```suggestion
A review of T-cell mediated responses to respiratory coronaviruses notes a large reduction in T-cells associated with the acute phase of SARS (from SARS-CoV-1) [@doi:10.1007/s12026-014-8534-z].
```

> For another aspect of acquired immunity, a review of T-cell mediated responses to respiratory coronaviruses notes a large reduction in T-cells associated with the acute phase of SARS (from SARS-CoV-1) [@doi: 10.1007/s12026-014-8534-z].

Author: ```suggestion
A review of T-cell mediated responses to respiratory coronaviruses notes a large reduction in T-cells associated with the acute phase of SARS (from SARS-CoV-1) [@doi: 10.1007/s12026-014-8534-z].
```

Author: continuing with feedback/edits from Dr. Nadia Danilova.

> So far, some articles and reviews on SARS-CoV-2 mention evidence for reduction in the number of CD4 and CD19 T-cells as well as NK-cells [@doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2020.04.009; @doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.009].

Author: ```suggestion
So far, some articles and reviews on SARS-CoV-2 mention evidence for reduction in the number of CD4 and CD19 T-cells as well as NK-cells [@doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.04.009; @doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.009].
```

> So far, some articles and reviews on SARS-CoV-2 also mention some evidence for reduction in the number of certain T-cells as well as NK-cells [@doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2020.04.009; @doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.009].

Author: ```suggestion
So far, some articles and reviews on SARS-CoV-2 also mention evidence for reduction in the number of CD4 and CD19 T-cells as well as NK-cells [@doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2020.04.009; @doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.009].
```

Author: incorporated feedback/edits from Dr. Nadia Danilova.

> So far, some articles and reviews on SARS-CoV-2 also mention evidence for reduction in the number of CD4 and CD19 T-cells as well as NK-cells [@doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2020.04.009; @doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.009].

Author: ```suggestion
So far, some articles and reviews on SARS-CoV-2 mention evidence for reduction in the number of CD4 and CD19 T-cells as well as NK-cells [@doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2020.04.009; @doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.009].
```

Author: continuing with edits

As a brief immunology background primer for vaccines, which we discuss later, we note that adaptive immunity also has mechanisms for long-term immunity: during a first exposure to a pathogen innate and also later acquired immune responses operate; at the same time, the acquired immune system forms memory B cells and memory T cells based on this experience so that on a possible future second exposure to the same pathogen an earlier/faster and stronger acquired immune response is generated which largely prevents or greatly reduces infection.

> Vaccines are in general attenuated or inactivated pathogens or antigen parts of pathogens which are meant to generate long-term memory of a pathogen or antigens of a pathogen so that if or when a person is exposed to the actual pathogen in the future they will have a strong acquired immunity memory response similar to what occurs upon second exposure to a pathogen; we will describe specific research into vaccines in detail later.

Author: ```suggestion
Vaccines are in general attenuated or inactivated pathogens or antigen parts of pathogens which are meant to generate long-term memory of a pathogen so that if a person is exposed to the same pathogen in the future they will have a strong immunity memory response; we will describe specific research into vaccines in detail later.
```

Author: incorporated feedback/edits from Dr. Nadia Danilova.

> Other immune system features and pathogen-immune system interactions which are related to particular diagnostics and therapeutics are also described for context within the Diagnostics and Therapeutics sections.

Author: ```suggestion
Other immune system features and pathogen-immune system interactions which are related to particular diagnostics and therapeutics are described within the Diagnostics and Therapeutics sections.
```

Author: incorporated feedback/edits from Dr. Nadia Danilova.
